So time to guard some routes, we don't want to be able to access the new post or edit posts routes
if we are not logged in. For that, we can use so-called route guards, a feature provided by the Angular
router. For this I'll
first of all create such a guard in my auth folder and I'll name the file auth.guard.ts. A guard is
just a service in the end,
it's a class which we export which should be named auth guard, here since this is what it'll do
and now what does guard mean? Angular
add some interfaces your classes can implement which forces the classes to add certain methods which
the @angular/router can execute before it loads a route to check whether it should proceed or do something
else
and one such interface which helps us with protecting routes is the CanActivate interface which you
import from @angular/router.
Now this CanActivate interface actually is implemented in the following way, in Visual Studio Code,
I can automatically implement it by clicking on the red squiggly lines,
then on that light bulb here and then clicking implement interface.
So if you're not using that IDE, you have to add a method called canActivate with a lowercase c at
the beginning which receives two arguments,
the route you are trying to load which is of type activated route snapshot which you need to import
from the @angular/router package and the getState which is a snapshot of the entire router state,
you also need to import that type. And then canActivate has to return either a boolean or since it can also
run asynchronously, an observable or a promise which eventually yields a boolean.
Now we also need to import that observable type to be able to use it here,
so let's import observable from rxjs and now we get our auth guard set up
and this will always throw an error which is of course not what we want,
so let's delete that,
let's instead return such a boolean.
If we return true here or a promise or an observable which eventually yields true, then the router will
know that the route which we were protecting is accessible, so that the user may access this. If you
return false,
the router will deny to go there.
Well before returning false, you should also navigate the user away therefore and redirect,
otherwise you'll just block the loading of the page but not provide an alternative.
Now of course we don't want to hardcode
true or false into that file,
we want to get that information from the auth service which is where we store the information whether the user
is authenticated or not.
So let's go to that service by injecting it and for injecting something into that
auth guard since this essentially is also just a service,
we have to add @injectable
because remember, if you want to inject services into services, you have to add this annotation and you
also have to import injectable from @angular/core.
With that we can go to the constructor and inject our auth service which is of type auth service
and that of course again means that you should also import auth service from your auth service file,
so make sure to import this path here. With it injected, we can use it here in
canActivate. We can get a new constant, isAuth and simply reach out to this auth service, getIsAuth because
that holds the information whether the user is authenticated or not
and this is updated if we login or logout, so we can rely on this being current.
So now we can simply use that, here in an if check and if we are authenticated, then I want to return true
but actually I want to do something if we are not authenticated. Then I want to navigate away and we
can do this by injecting the router.
So here I will inject the router which is of type router and which is imported from the @angular/router
package,
so make sure to add this import
and then here, I call this router navigate and I will navigate to the root page.
You could also navigate to /login for example, to tell the user hey you need to login first,
let's maybe do that.
That's all,
we just continue and here at the end, I will return isAuth,
so this will be true if we are authenticated and false otherwise.
Now we just need to add this guard and we do add it in the app routing module. Since it is a service, we need
to provide it and whilst you should rarely provide services in that special module, guards are perfectly fine
to be provided there,
so let's add the providers array and let's add the auth guard type which you need to import of course,
so make sure to add an import statement where you import auth guard from your auth guard file path.
With that it's made available, now you just need to attach it to the routes you want to protect
and that would be these two routes. We can add it by adding another property, canActivate which takes
an array of guards
we want to run on these routes whenever the router tries to load them, tries to activate them, you could
say.
So here I will point at auth guard and I will do the very same for the edit route.
So now these two routes are protected and that means that if we now reload and I manually enter
/create,
keep in mind I'm not authenticated now,
I am indeed forwarded to the login page. And that of course is exactly the behavior we want,
now we're protecting these routes on the front-end against unauthenticated access.
Now important to keep in mind, this is just a user interface, a user experience thing,
we were protecting our back-end before already,
you could never create posts, that would always have failed but now, we're also preventing situations
where the user might do something which is doomed to fail and which would therefore provide a bad user
experience.
We can now avoid this because now, the user can't get into a situation where he tries to do something
he's not allowed to do.